In this concept, we will learn about functions.
Solidity supports functions, just like other languages.
A basic syntax of function declaration looks like this.
If you look on the screen,
we have the keyword function,
followed by the function name,
and then any arguments passed,
followed by function type.
Now, you can have many function types here.
We will talk about this in our next slide.
Then, if there is a return value,
we will save returns,
and then in bracket the return value,
or the type of return,
that you're trying to make from this function.
Then, we have out our curly braces,
and the function definition inside it.
So, this is what a typical function statement would look like.
Now, let's talk about various function types now.
So, the very first one that you see on this chart,
on the screen is a public.
So, public means anyone with an Ethereum account can call this function.
It is visible to everyone,
it will be a part of the ABI,
the application binary interface.
So, that means anyone can call this function,
it will be visible to everyone who has an Ethereum account.
Now, public and private really don't imply security too much,
it is more for the programmers,
to imply that this function can be called or not.
For example, helper functions could be made private.
Private functions are not even available in the derived contracts.
So, they're not available,
there only available inside this contract.
So, like I said, if there are helper functions that
you want to call one function from another function,
and they have absolutely no other purpose, make them private.
The next visibility that we wanted,
or the function type we wanted to talk about,
is view or constant.
Now, this specifies that the function cannot modify contracts data.
Now, interchangeable names, I mostly see view,
but you might see contracts that's a constant.
So, I just wanted to let you know but view is good enough.
So, it specifies that the function cannot modify contracts data.
So, if you have a function that is not changing any state or modifying any data,
only looking at some data,
then you should provide the word keyword view here.
Pure, means that you cannot modify nor you can view contracts data.
Payable, this keyword means that whenever some outside source,
or some outside entity like you or me attempts to call this function,
we might call or try to call it and send money along with this function call.
Now, this next slide on your screen that you see,
explains you four different visibility types.
So, we talked about function types,
now this information overlaps but again,
definitely wanted to show you the visibility separately.
So, we have four visibility types in Solidity;
public, private, internal, and external.
Again, I wanted to mention that these visibilities apply to functions,
and variables too.
External function types.
External functions are part of the contract interface,
which means they can be called from other contracts, and via transactions.
External function cannot be called internally,
like a normal function call,
you can call it using this keyword.
Internal functions, what are they?
Internal functions and state variables can only be accessed internally,
that is from within the contract or contract deriving from it without using this keyword.
In Solidity, a function may be called from within the contract,
or from outside the contract,
or even other outside applications.
So, the internal function calls are encoded by compiler as cold jumps.
Calls made from outside contracts,
or outside applications, use the EVM message call for function invocations.
So, we just talked about public and private visibilities in a previous slide.
So, you know what those means.
Again, a public visibility means that
anyone with an Ethereum account can call this function.
It is visible to everyone.
It will be a part of the ABI.
Private functions are only visible from within this contract,
not even from the derived contracts.
They restrict the visibility to only the compiler,
you can set the visibility to internal.
They restrict the visibility only through EVM.
So, that means other contracts cannot call this function.
You can set the visibility to external.
We can also set the visibility of storage variables to be internal,
if you want it to be available only from this contract,
and also from derived contracts.
Storage variables cannot be declared external,
since they are stored with the contract.
So, again, important piece of information,
you cannot make storage variables external,
because they are stored with the contract,
so that means you should be able to call them.
Okay. Moving on. So, by default,
a function is public unless specified differently.
So, if you forget to specify public,
of course the compiler will give you a warning,
but it's still going to initiate the contract,
and the contract will be public,
unless you specify differently.
So, again, important information is that Solidity automatically creates getter functions,
if you create a public storage variables.
So, if you have variables that you like to look on the screen,
for example, so if you're doing something like string ownerName, line of code.
So, if you have a line of code that says string ownerName,
we are creating a variable ownerName,
but not making it public,
so no getter function will be created.
But if you say string public ownerName,
we are making it public,
a getter function will be created automatically.
Same name as the name of the variable, in this case,
a function will be created,
the name of the function would be ownerName.
Part of information, functions can have multiple return values.
So, when a function returns multiple values to an outside application,
the result is returned as an array of values.
Impart an information again remember,
if there are multiple return values to an outside application,
the result is going to be returned as an array of values.
Now, Solidity does support function overloading.
What that means is that,
you can have more than one function,
with the same name,
as long as input parameters are different.
So, Solidity does support function overloading.
Let us summarize functions.
An automatic getter function is created with the same name as a public variable,
for public storage names, variables.
A public function can be called from inside the contract,
and also from external sources.
A private function can only be called from within this contract,
not even from the derived contracts.
External functions can only be called from the outside application,
but from within the contract,
we will have to use the word this.
So, this operator would be used for those kind of function calls.
Internal functions can only be called from within the contract,
and also from derived contract,
but not from outside applications at all.